---
layout: post
title: "Contributing to DocX, a .NET Word processing library"
tags: [word, docx, html]
author: Faizan Javed
mail: faizanjaved@gmail.com
published: true
summary: Our contributions to DocX, the open source .NET Word processing library.
---

{% include JB/setup %}

One of the many great things about working at The Network is that development teams are encouraged to make use of and contribute back to open source software projects. We recently completed a product feature to enable clients to import HTML content from Word: a Word document-to-HTML importer. To accomplish this we evaluated some commercial libraries but it looked like the Word Document processing capability was niche enough to encourage those commercial offerings to enforce egregious licensing costs and agreements.

After investigating Word document processing alternatives in the open-source space, we chose [DocX](http://docx.codeplex.com/) because it had a small but active group of contributors, a founder who was genuinely enthusiastic about our efforts to contribute to the project, and an easy to use API with enough base features to get us going. It also helped that the features we were planning to extend DocX with were also some of the most requested by the community.

Since we are strong proponents of Git and GitHub we created a mirror repository of [DocX at Github](https://github.com/Word-DocX/DocX). This post will not go into details of existing features of DocX (those are readily available at either project site), but will instead focus on our main contributions to DocX: **Sections** and **Lists**


##Sections

We have added support for section breaks (Continuous and Next Page) as well as the capability to get a list of sections in a document and the paragraphs that belong to those sections. 

Consider the following example: 


    document.InsertParagraph("First Para");
    document.InsertParagraph("Second Para");
    document.InsertSection();
    document.InsertParagraph("This is default para");

    List <sections> sections = document.GetSections();

    List<Paragraph> paraInSection = sections[0].SectionParagraphs;
    

To create a section containing two paragraphs, add two paragraphs to the document and then insert a section break (the default section break type is continuous). The third paragraph added is contained in the default section (every Word document has one default section).

Similarly, you can use the **InsertSectionPageBreak()** method to insert a next page section break. DocX also supported a method (on a paragraph, not on the document) called **InsertPageBreakBeforeSelf()** and **InsertPageBreakAfterSelf()** which just inserts a page break (without creating a new section). 

One thing to point out is that inserting a normal page break does not actually create a separate section, it simply inserts paragraph that indicates the display to show the content following on a separate page. The significance of not adding a section is that the default section formatting is still in effect for the text on both pages, where if you create a new section, then you also create a new default section formatting definition.

The **GetSections()** method returns a list of Sections in a document. The **SectionParagraphs** property returns a list of paragraphs in a section.


##Lists

In Word, Lists are representated as Paragraphs. We extended Paragraphs with **IsListItem** and **ListItemType** properties and added support for multi-level Numbered and Bullet lists. 

In the following example we create a bullet list with a list item, add a second list item to the list and then insert the list into the document.


    var list = document.AddList("Test item 1.", 0, ListItemType.Bulleted);
    document.AddListItem(list, "Test item 2.");
    document.InsertList(list);


A list can also start with a different start number - the example below creates a Numbered list which starts at 5.


    var list = document.AddList("Test", 0, ListItemType.Numbered, 5);
    

We have enjoyed working with the DocX library and recommend it to anyone looking for a robust and easy-to-use open-source Word document processing library.