---
title: "Principles of Documentation"
layout: post
tags: [documentation, development, best, practices]
published: false
author: Randall Borck
mail: "randallborck@tnwinc.com"
summary: Learning how to utilize documentation and realizing the benefits is a big part of growing a successful company.
---

There are many growing pains as a company matures from a startup to an established enterprise. Many of these pains are around how an organization grows. When new developers and quality assurance personnel are hired, the veterans teach the newbies how the organization works. Anyone who has experienced this knows it can be a huge time sink, but worse than that, how often do we configure our machines from scratch? Most of us do it when we get a new computer and then we make tweaks as we go along. A few of us may use virtual machine (VM) snapshots, but typically these VMs are maintained after everything has been installed, so only the newest changes are applied. This can cause complications with new members of the team joining because we tend to configure things once and then forget about them. Once they have been forgotten, troubleshooting the problems can consume a lot of time, and generally going through this once is more time consuming than documenting the installation process.

As an industry, many companies have accepted unit tests to give confidence that a code refactor has left the system in a stable, working state. When the code needs to be refactored, it is difficult for the original developer to remember all the implications of the change, much less a different developer that has been tasked with making the change because the original developer has moved on to other things. For a growing company to maximize profitability, documentation is essential and must become a forethought instead of an afterthought (or a regretful non-thought).

The hardest parts of documentation is choosing to do it, and that can be compounded when you have to find a place to keep it. If you have a solution that works for you, then use it, otherwise a wiki may be a good choice. Github utilizes a wiki by default as well as a readme. I have found it very useful to document the initial installation and setup instructions in the readme, and add peripheral instructions and general how-tos to the wiki. At The Network, we have also found that having a Definition of Done checklist has been a helpful way of ensuring that things are documented appropriately as we develop solutions. I once has an engineering instructor who always said "Fast is slow", and this applies very well here. The fastest way forward is to slow down long enough to document your steps as you go, document your troubleshooting solutions, and take the time to design your solution before you develop them.

Focus first on writing something down *anywhere*. Some ways that I've found to help me make documentation easier, in practice, is to always have a notepad (preferrably digital) available and copy/paste *everything* into it as you do it. For example, when you are setting up a new system, you download and install programs. While it is downloading, simply add to the notepad the name of the application and the website it came from an add it to a section like **Installs**. When you are configuring your system, simply copy and paste the commands into a section like **Configuration**. When you find something that breaks, copy URLs that you used that had the solution and write down the solution that worked. If you can, you may also choose to take screenshots as you change configurations and add them. Create a **Troubleshooting** section to hold information about problems that arise for one person, but perhaps didn't surface for someone else. Once everything is in a digital text form, it is very easy to delete irrelevant/obsolete parts, search for revisited issues, and transfer the information to your designated knowlegebase. Even if you don't choose a knowlegebase solution initially, you can always send the new guy your text document of installation steps in an email, print it and hand it to him, or skim through it to answer questions. At the point you are ready to pass off the documentation, I would recommend using the wiki and make it the new person's job to update or fix any issues with the documentation. After a few people have joined your company, you will realize that your company now has a streamlined process for handling new hires, training documentation, and it will help speed up the time to productivity of the new hires, which helps them feel like your company is a great place to work!

Of the many benefits you will experience when you introduce documentation to a company, you will be recognized as a valuable resource to the company, you will spend less time helping others fix their system, and you will not have to worry about forgetting how you set up your system in the first place. Just as unit tests ensure your code accomplishes the desired task and protects that task from future refactors, documentation will streamline your development process and allow your organization to move forward quickly and effectively. It will also help with training new personnel and empower the new hires to learn more quickly with less interruptions to your more senior staff.
