---
layout: post
title: "Pig Latin"
tags: [sublime, testing, i18n]
author: Chris Breiding
mail: chrisbreiding@tnwinc.com
published: true
summary: Pig Latin - how and why we use it and a useful tool for translating to it.
---

{% include JB/setup %}

When you think of Pig Latin, you probably imagine having fun with it as a child, using it as a 'secret language' between friends or just enjoying the silly way it sounds. We've found a use for it here that's just as fun and also very practical.

When we develop a piece of UI that contains a title, label, set of instructions, etc., we naturally write it in English. Labels such as 'Title:' and buttons that say "Cancel" are all over the place, but those need to be translated for our suite to be used by non-English speakers.

We have an internationalizaton (i18n) infrastructure in place, but each time we add a new label or button, it needs to be plugged into that infrastructure and we need to test it to ensure we set it up properly (we're only human after all). Arguably, the best method of testing the setup is to actually translate the piece of UI into another language. But surely we can't expect developers and QA to all be able to read and write another language ... or can we?

Our solution: use Pig Latin.

Any time we create a new piece of UI, we translate it into Pig Latin. It's great because it doesn't require knowledge of an actual non-English language, so developers and QA can write and test the translation without putting much thought into it. Even better, the translation can be automated.

I got tired of turning English word-by-word into Pig Latin, so I wrote a [Sublime Text plugin](https://github.com/tnwinc/SublimePigLatin) that does it for me. All it takes a single keystroke to translate any given amount of English to Pig Latin.

So it's super easy to turn

    The quick red fox jumped over the lazy brown dog.

into

    Ethay ickquay edray oxfay umpedjay overway ethay azylay ownbray ogday.

You might ask - what part of this is fun? Well, just say the following out loud and tell me it's not fun:

    Overnancegay, Iskray, andway Ompliancecay
